>> Jafar Husain: Here's
an interesting question.
If I call subscribe three times on
the one timeout observable I get.
So if I go,
>> Jafar Husain: Submit, just go ahead and
print this out.
>> Jafar Husain: So if I do this, I think
we'd all expect that I get done, right?
Or let's just write this,
cuz it's gonna on next, me and undefined.
So let's give that a shot.
What the hell?
We're doing it live here.
So hey, all right, we got an observable.
Now, we're cooking, right?
So if I was to call subscribe three
more times on the same observable,
what do we think would happen?
>> Jafar Husain: Anyone
want to hazard a guess?
No wrong answers.
Well, there are wrong answers, but
we won't give you a hard time about it.
>> Speaker 2: So you're subscribing to the
same observable three times you're saying?
>> Jafar Husain: Yeah,
how many setTimeouts am I gonna get?
>> Speaker 2: One setTimeout,
but three next and dones.
>> Jafar Husain: So that is a very,
very common misconception.
And it's very common, and
that's why we're doing this.
So let's actually see what
happens when we run this twice.
Just get it twice,
cuz it'll be easier to debug.
So I'm gonna do this frequently here.
We're gonna set up a debugger, and
that's how we're gonna figure out what's
actually going on under
the hood with our observable.
And I will pump up that font size.
So there's a little garbage in here
from jsbin which you can just ignore.
So we see there's two subscriptions.
Can I even see my,
>> Jafar Husain: I
do not have my debugging,
I guess cuz this is two-bit, there we go.
If you can't see that let me know.
But let's see what happens when
we step in to subscribe here.
Oops!
We hopped into the subscribe
method that every observable gets.
But remember, that's just a little hop and
skip and a jump
to the real definition of subscribe that
was passed in here on the constructor.
So now, we make it into our real
definition of subscribe for
this timeoutObservable.
Does everybody see how that happened?
Take a moment.
Right, we're here and what are we doing?
Well, we're calling setTimeout.
Cool, and I'm gonna step over that.
And that setTimeout's
gonna hit eventually.
We're gonna return our subscription and
where do we find ourselves?
Well, wait a second, now,
we're out to the next subscribe, right?
Cuz the setTimeout hasn't hit yet.
It's waiting, and when we step in here and
step in there, wait a second.
We found ourselves to calling
a second setTimeout, right?
Why did this happen, right?
Maybe our intuition was we were
only gonna get one setTimeout and
two subscriptions to that setTimeout.
Well, this goes to the nature,
the very nature of what an observable is,
it's a function in object clothing.
It's actually just a function,
subscribe's a function.
If you create a function
called write to the console,
and call it twice, how many times
are you gonna write to the console?
Twice, right?
We can see from this simple definition
that our friend observable is nothing but
a function with an object wrapper, right?
So, oops.
>> Jafar Husain: Let's take another look,
right?
What have we done when we've
created an observable?
We've just created a wrapper,
it has a function on it.
And if we call that function twice, all
the logic in that function gets executed
multiple times and
this is something we call laziness, right?
A function is kinda lazy.
It's not gonna do anything
until you call it.
But if you call it multiple times,
you're gonna get multiple side effects.
And so today we're gonna talk
a little bit about side effects,
cuz sometimes they're
a little bit unexpected.
And this is an interesting difference
between observable and for
those here who are familiar with them,
promises, right?
If you subscribe to the same
promise multiple times using then,
you're not actually gonna
get additional side effects.
But with observable, you might.
And so there are ways in which you can
effectively make sure that you don't get
three or four, five sets of the same
side effects for an observable.
And we'll talk about that later today,
it's called subjects.
But it's also, can anybody tell me why it
might be useful to repeat side effects
when you subscribe to the same observable?
Isn't that always kinda
just a waste of time?
>> Speaker 3: Different components might
have different needs in observable.
>> Jafar Husain: Well, but
if you have, that's true, but
if you have just an observable.
All you can do is listen to it, right?
You can't really affect the data that
comes out of it by the time you have one
observable, right?
With timeout,
we can create a new observable that
fires after a certain amount of time.
But once you have that observable, right?
If three different components
have the same observable,
they can't really impact
what comes out of it.
So why would you want say three network
requests when subscribing to one
observable three times,
cuz that's the implication of
what we're talking about here.
If I have an observable that
fires a network request, and
I've subscribed to it three times,
I'm gonna get three network requests.
So this is one of the things that
catches developers off guard.
Can any of you think of a good
reason to do it though?
>> Speaker 4: If it was, if you had like
a hot observable and like you needed data
for everything that subscribed, maybe
you would need to make another request.
>> Jafar Husain: Well, let's talk
about what you mean by hot observable,
cuz it's a really interesting idea here.
A hot observable and a cold observable
are some terms we use to help
us understand the behavior
of an observable.
A cold observable is really
simple to understand.
No matter how many times you subscribe to
it, you always get the same result, right?
That's a cold observable.
A hot observable,
depending on when you subscribe to it,
you might actually get different data.
Can anybody think of an example
of a hot event stream?
Like maybe in the browser.
>> Speaker 4: Click handlers.
>> Jafar Husain: Click handlers, right.
I mean, or mouse move,
or any of these events.
We know that if I start listening
to an event seven seconds later,
I might miss a bunch of events,
right, just good common sense.
But let's take a look at
our timeout observable.
Am I ever gonna miss the timeout,
no matter when I subscribe
to this observable.
So let's take a look down here, right?
Let's actually put this
whole thing to setTimeout.
>> Jafar Husain: If I wait five seconds,
am I gonna miss the timeout notification?
If I wait five seconds before
subscribing to the observable,
am I gonna miss the timeout notification?
Who thinks yes?
Who thinks no?
>> Speaker 5: I think no,
because it looks like when we subscribe
is when it actually sets the timeout.
>> Jafar Husain: Right, the thing about
this observable is that it doesn't do
the work until you actually subscribe.
And that's why in this context,
it's a cold observable.
And that's typically how functions work,
right?
They don't do anything until we call them.
So because observable's just really
a thin wrapper for a subscribe method,
any work you do inside of that subscribe
method, as long as you kick it off when we
subscribe, then you're always
going to get the result.
So notice that the timeout
doesn't get created.
All right, we don't call setTimeout
when this happens, right?
We know that because when we step through,
when we did this,
we didn't do a damn thing, right?
All we did was we created an observable,
and
that's really just a function
waiting to be called.
And that's how observable does laziness,
that's how we can map, and filter, and
reduce, and scan.
We haven't really done anything, though.
Because all we've done is we've
built up a bunch of functions
which hold on to each other
waiting to be called.
And how do we actually
call the observable?
How do we get it to do things,
what function?
Subscribe, absolutely, and
that's lazy evaluation.
It's not doing work until you
absolutely need to do it.
So now, we've seen an example
of a cold observable.
And the reason it's a called
observable is it waits patiently,
doesn't do a damn thing
until we subscribe, right?
What's an example of a hot observable?
I think we already heard one,
it's event streams, right?
So let's build that next,
let's make a way of creating
an observable based on DOM events.